---
layout: post
title: "Bio-MAF 1.0.1"
date: 2012-08-21 11:00
comments: true
categories:
---

Bio-MAF 1.0.1 is released! As described in my [last post][], this
includes support for BGZF-compressed MAF files and a command-line
[maf_extract(1)][] tool exposing almost all of the library's random
access functionality in an orthogonal way from the command line. It
also includes a substantial overhaul of the [maf_tile(1)][] tool,
adding a `--concat` option for concatenation of several tiled
intervals. This supports one of the original motivating use cases for
this library, enabling alignments corresponding to a set of exons to
be concatenated and any gaps filled from a reference sequence. The
resulting output corresponds to their mRNA product.

[last post]: http://csw.github.com/bioruby-maf/blog/2012/08/05/bgzf_and_testing/
[maf_extract(1)]: http://csw.github.com/bioruby-maf/man/maf_extract.1.html
[maf_tile(1)]: http://csw.github.com/bioruby-maf/man/maf_tile.1.html

Several other new maf_tile options support integration into
[Galaxy][].

[Galaxy]: http://usegalaxy.org/

Since my last post, I have also made substantial performance
improvements in BGZF compression and exercised the parser and indexing
functionality on the entire set of UCSC multiz46way MAF files. This
led to better memory management, handling of extended-range UCSC bins
in indexing, better logging and warning generation, index version
validation, index error reporting, and other work to make this library
more robust and useful.

Sadly, this is the end of the Google Summer of Code. I've enjoyed
working on Bio-MAF, getting to know the BioRuby community and
especially my fantastic mentors, and most of all, delivering a useful
piece of bioinformatics software. Thanks also to Google for organizing
and funding this!

While the Summer of Code is over, I plan to continue to maintain
Bio-MAF. While the originally envisioned feature set has been
implemented, I will at least keep it up to date with
dependencies. And, of course, if you use this library or are
considering it, please file Github issues (or, better yet, pull
requests) for any bugs, problem reports, feature requests, or
suggestions you may have.
